README.md, before:

mathcat [![Build Status](https://travis-ci.org/soudy/mathcat.svg?branch=master)](https://travis-ci.org/soudy/mathcat) [![GoDoc](https://godoc.org/github.com/soudy/mathcat?status.svg)](https://godoc.org/github.com/soudy/mathcat)
===============
mathcat is an expression evaluating library and REPL in Go with basic arithmetic,
functions, variables and more.

## Features
mathcat doesn't just evaluate basic expressions, it has some tricks up its
sleeve. Here's a list with some of its features:

- Hex literals (0xDEADBEEF)
- Binary literals (0b1101001)
- Octal literals (0o126632)
- Scientific notation (24e3)
- Variables (with UTF-8 support)
- Functions ([list](#functions))
- Bitwise operators
- Relational operators
- Some handy [predefined variables](#predefined-variables)
- Its own [REPL](#repl)

## Installation
### Library
```bash
go get github.com/soudy/mathcat
```

### REPL
```bash
go get github.com/soudy/mathcat/cmd/mathcat
```

## REPL usage
The REPL can be used by simply launching `mathcat`:
```bash
mathcat> 8**8
16777216
mathcat> (8**8) - e # Look, a comment!
16777213.28
```

Or it can read from `stdin` like so:

```bash
echo "3**pi * (6 - -7)" | mathcat
```

## Library usage
There are three different ways to evaluate expressions, the first way is by
calling `Eval`, the second way is by creating a new instance and using `Run`,
and the final way is to use `Exec` in which you can pass a map with variables to
use in the expression in which you can pass a map with variables to use in the
expression.

### Eval
If you're not planning on declaring variables, you can use `Eval`. `Eval`
will evaluate an expression and return its result.

```go
res, err := mathcat.Eval("2 * pi * 5") // pi is a predefined variable
if err != nil {
    // handle errors
}
fmt.Printf("Result: %f\n", res) // Result: 31.41592653589793
```

### Run
You can use `Run` for a more featureful approach. With this method you can
assign and use variables across the `Parser` instance.

```go
p := mathcat.New()
p.Run("a = 1")
p.Run("b = 3")
res, err := p.Run("a + b * b") // 10
```

### Exec
To pass external variables to an expression without using `Run`, you can use
`Exec` to pass a map of variables.

```go
res, err := mathcat.Exec("a + b * b", map[string]float64{
    "a": 1,
    "b": 3,
}) // 10
```

Besides evaluating expressions, mathcat also offers some other handy functions.
### GetVar
You can get a defined variable at any time with `GetVar`.
```go
p := mathcat.New()
p.Run("酷 = -33")
if val, err := p.GetVar("酷"); !err {
    fmt.Printf("%f\n", val) // -33
}
```

### IsWholeNumber
Check if a `float64` is a whole number.
```go
if mathcat.IsWholeNumber(res) {
    fmt.Printf("%d\n", int64(res))
} else {
    fmt.Printf("%f\n", res)
}
```

### Supported operators

| Operator   | Description           |
|:----------:|:---------------------:|
| =          | assignment            |
| +          | addition              |
| -          | subtraction           |
| /          | division              |
| *          | multiply              |
| **         | power                 |
| %          | remainder             |
| &          | bitwise and           |
| \|         | bitwise or            |
| ^          | bitwise xor           |
| <<         | bitwise left shift    |
| >>         | bitwise right shift   |
| ~          | bitwise not           |
| ==         | equal                 |
| !=         | not equal             |
| >          | greater than          |
| >=         | greater than or equal |
| <          | less than             |
| <=         | less than or equal    |

All of these except `~` and relational operators also have an assignment
variant (`+=`, `-=`, `**=` etc.) that can be used to assign values to variables.

### Functions
mathcat has a big list of functions you can use. A function call is invoked like
in most programming languages, with an identifier followed by a left parentheses
like this: `max(5, 10)`.

| Function     | Arguments   | Description                                                                    |
|:------------:|:-----------:|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| abs          | 1           | returns the absolute value of given number                                     |
| acos         | 1           | returns the arccosine of given number, in radians                              |
| sin          | 1           | returns the sine of given number                                               |
| cos          | 1           | returns the cosine of given number                                             |
| tan          | 1           | returns the tangent of given number                                            |
| asin         | 1           | returns the arcsine of given number                                            |
| acos         | 1           | returns the acosine of given number                                            |
| atan         | 1           | returns the arctangent of given number                                         |
| ceil         | 1           | function returns the smallest integer greater than or equal to a given number  |
| floor        | 1           | returns the largest integer less than or equal to a given number               |
| log          | 1           | returns the natural logarithm of given number                                  |
| max          | 2           | returns the larger of the two given numbers                                    |
| min          | 2           | returns the smaller of the two given numbers                                   |
| sqrt         | 1           | returns the square root of given number                                        |
| rand         | 0           | returns a random float between 0.0 and 1.0                                     |
| factorial    | 1           | returns the factorial of  given number                                         |
| list         | 0           | list all functions                                                             |

### Predefined variables
There are some handy predefined variables you can use (and change) throughout
your expressions:

- pi
- tau
- phi
- e

## Documentation
For a more technical description of mathcat, see [here](https://godoc.org/github.com/soudy/mathcat).

## License
This project is licensed under the MIT License. See the [LICENSE](https://github.com/soudy/mathcat/blob/master/LICENSE) file for the full license.

Commit message:

Rename binary to mc and add --mode argument to mc

README.md, after:

mathcat [![Build Status](https://travis-ci.org/soudy/mathcat.svg?branch=master)](https://travis-ci.org/soudy/mathcat) [![GoDoc](https://godoc.org/github.com/soudy/mathcat?status.svg)](https://godoc.org/github.com/soudy/mathcat)
===============
mathcat is an expression evaluating library and REPL in Go with basic arithmetic,
functions, variables and more.

## Features
mathcat doesn't just evaluate basic expressions, it has some tricks up its
sleeve. Here's a list with some of its features:

- Hex literals (0xDEADBEEF)
- Binary literals (0b1101001)
- Octal literals (0o126632)
- Scientific notation (24e3)
- Variables (with UTF-8 support)
- Functions ([list](#functions))
- Bitwise operators
- Relational operators
- Some handy [predefined variables](#predefined-variables)
- Its own [REPL](#repl)

## Installation
### Library
```bash
go get github.com/soudy/mathcat
```

### REPL
```bash
go get github.com/soudy/mathcat/cmd/mc
```

## REPL usage
The REPL can be used by simply launching `mc`:
```bash
mc> 8**8
16777216
mc> (8**8) - e # Look, a comment!
16777213.28
```

Or it can read from `stdin` like so:

```bash
echo "3**pi * (6 - -7)" | mc
```

### Arguments

| Name      | Description                                                                   |
|-----------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| precision | decimal precision used in results                                             |
| mode      | type of literal used as result. can be number (default), hex, binary or octal |

## Library usage
There are three different ways to evaluate expressions, the first way is by
calling `Eval`, the second way is by creating a new instance and using `Run`,
and the final way is to use `Exec` in which you can pass a map with variables to
use in the expression in which you can pass a map with variables to use in the
expression.

### Eval
If you're not planning on declaring variables, you can use `Eval`. `Eval`
will evaluate an expression and return its result.

```go
res, err := mathcat.Eval("2 * pi * 5") // pi is a predefined variable
if err != nil {
    // handle errors
}
fmt.Printf("Result: %f\n", res) // Result: 31.41592653589793
```

### Run
You can use `Run` for a more featureful approach. With this method you can
assign and use variables across the `Parser` instance.

```go
p := mathcat.New()
p.Run("a = 1")
p.Run("b = 3")
res, err := p.Run("a + b * b") // 10
```

### Exec
To pass external variables to an expression without using `Run`, you can use
`Exec` to pass a map of variables.

```go
res, err := mathcat.Exec("a + b * b", map[string]float64{
    "a": 1,
    "b": 3,
}) // 10
```

Besides evaluating expressions, mathcat also offers some other handy functions.
### GetVar
You can get a defined variable at any time with `GetVar`.
```go
p := mathcat.New()
p.Run("酷 = -33")
if val, err := p.GetVar("酷"); !err {
    fmt.Printf("%f\n", val) // -33
}
```

### IsWholeNumber
Check if a `float64` is a whole number.
```go
if mathcat.IsWholeNumber(res) {
    fmt.Printf("%d\n", int64(res))
} else {
    fmt.Printf("%f\n", res)
}
```

### Supported operators

| Operator   | Description           |
|:----------:|:---------------------:|
| =          | assignment            |
| +          | addition              |
| -          | subtraction           |
| /          | division              |
| *          | multiply              |
| **         | power                 |
| %          | remainder             |
| &          | bitwise and           |
| \|         | bitwise or            |
| ^          | bitwise xor           |
| <<         | bitwise left shift    |
| >>         | bitwise right shift   |
| ~          | bitwise not           |
| ==         | equal                 |
| !=         | not equal             |
| >          | greater than          |
| >=         | greater than or equal |
| <          | less than             |
| <=         | less than or equal    |

All of these except `~` and relational operators also have an assignment
variant (`+=`, `-=`, `**=` etc.) that can be used to assign values to variables.

### Functions
mathcat has a big list of functions you can use. A function call is invoked like
in most programming languages, with an identifier followed by a left parentheses
like this: `max(5, 10)`.

| Function     | Arguments   | Description                                                                    |
|:------------:|:-----------:|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| abs          | 1           | returns the absolute value of given number                                     |
| acos         | 1           | returns the arccosine of given number, in radians                              |
| sin          | 1           | returns the sine of given number                                               |
| cos          | 1           | returns the cosine of given number                                             |
| tan          | 1           | returns the tangent of given number                                            |
| asin         | 1           | returns the arcsine of given number                                            |
| acos         | 1           | returns the acosine of given number                                            |
| atan         | 1           | returns the arctangent of given number                                         |
| ceil         | 1           | function returns the smallest integer greater than or equal to a given number  |
| floor        | 1           | returns the largest integer less than or equal to a given number               |
| log          | 1           | returns the natural logarithm of given number                                  |
| max          | 2           | returns the larger of the two given numbers                                    |
| min          | 2           | returns the smaller of the two given numbers                                   |
| sqrt         | 1           | returns the square root of given number                                        |
| rand         | 0           | returns a random float between 0.0 and 1.0                                     |
| factorial    | 1           | returns the factorial of  given number                                         |
| list         | 0           | list all functions                                                             |

### Predefined variables
There are some handy predefined variables you can use (and change) throughout
your expressions:

- pi
- tau
- phi
- e

## Documentation
For a more technical description of mathcat, see [here](https://godoc.org/github.com/soudy/mathcat).

## License
This project is licensed under the MIT License. See the [LICENSE](https://github.com/soudy/mathcat/blob/master/LICENSE) file for the full license.
